Add glossary entries for dialect and vocabulary. (#484)
json-schema-org/json-schema-org.github.io: learn/glossary.md

The entries on this page can be linked to via anchor links (e.g. `https://json-schema.org/learn/glossary.html#vocabulary`) when sharing a definition with others.

### dialect

> A collection of [vocabularies](#vocabulary), along with an indication of whether supporting each vocabulary is required to process schemas written in the dialect.

Reviewer: I wonder if this definition is too tightly coupled to the Vocabulary System. First of all, the vocabulary system likely to change in the future possibly making this definition no longer make sense. Second, releases such as draft-07 that pre-date the Vocabulary System are considered dialects as well, but aren't defined by vocabularies. You can consider draft-07 as a single required vocabulary, but it's not defined that way.

I'd probably define a dialect as the set of keywords that are understood in a schema. Those keywords being defined by vocabularies is an artifact of the Vocabulary System and not necessarily a defining property of a dialect.

Author: Thanks! I took this definition basically with only minor change [from the spec](https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-core.html#name-overview):

> A dialect is defined as a set of vocabularies and their required support identified in a meta-schema.

Obviously we can change this definition if/when we change it elsewhere, but are you still suggesting we do so beforehand? (Or have we already changed the definition elsewhere and I missed it?)

> Second, releases such as draft-07 that pre-date the Vocabulary System are considered dialects as well, but aren't defined by vocabularies.

Interesting -- do you have a source for this? I'm not doubting you, I've just not heard it before but possibly just wasn't paying attention well enough -- are you saying we should define dialects this way or that others already do? I guess it also occurred to me that this may be the case because we call `$schema` now a "dialect identifier" even though draft 7 did not have one, so retroactively we must call draft 7 a dialect, but equally well we could retroactively say the dialect is defined by a single vocabulary, no?

Reviewer 2: > it also occurred to me that this may be the case because we call $schema now a "dialect identifier" even though draft 7 did not have one, so retroactively we must call draft 7 a dialect.

Correct.

> but equally well we could retroactively say the dialect is defined by a single vocabulary, no?

I don't know what this means.

Reviewer 2: @Julian so does "reatroactively say the dialect is defined by a single vocabulary" refer to considering draft-07 to be a single vocabulary?  Austin started talking about multiple vocabularies all the way back in draft-wright-*-00 (a.k.a. not-draft-05) in 2016:

>    Other specifications [besides JSON Schema Core] define the vocabularies that perform assertions  about validation, linking, annotation, navigation, and interaction.

The concept of JSON Schema vocabularies had its own [section in the spec](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-handrews-json-schema-00#section-4.3.2) in draft-07.
 
We just didn't settle on the exact number and granularity of them and _formalize_ vocabulary identification and selection until 2019-09.  But since 2016 we have always spoken of there being at least two vocabularies (core and validation) in the standard dialect, with hyper-schema as a third vocabulary.

Reviewer 2: We didn't have vocabulary-level meta-schemas prior to 2019-09 because without `$recursive*` or `$dynamic*`, it was too much of a pain to manage.  Hyper-Schema was enough of a pain on its own.  But vocabulary-level meta-schemas are just conveniences and best practices, they have no formal role in anything as distinct entities.

Author: Got it, thanks, so you disagree (well, the spec you linked disagrees) with what Jason said then, i.e. 

> Second, releases such as draft-07 that pre-date the Vocabulary System are considered dialects as well, but aren't defined by vocabularies.

that's not true, they indeed are defined by vocabularies, in the form that existed at the time?

> @Julian so does "reatroactively say the dialect is defined by a single vocabulary" refer to considering draft-07 to be a single vocabulary?

(Yes -- I wasn't aware and didn't check that the section you linked was present in draft 7, I took Jason's word for it).

What about draft 4, which doesn't mention the word vocabulary, though it's otherwise fairly similar structurally to draft 7, is it a dialect, and/or is https://json-schema.org/draft-04/schema its dialect URI?

All I'm trying to do is interpret definitions (and claims here) that are written down into a definition.

Reviewer 2: @Julian I think you're overthinking this a bit.  We weren't exactly trying to harmonize the terms across all past drafts.  Whether or not Jason's statement is true depends on whether he meant "vocabulary" in a general sense or "vocabulary" in a "think you can put in `$vocabulary`" sense, which feels like splitting hairs to me.

Meta-schema URIs are (retroactively) dialect URIs.  If you go back far enough (draft-04) a lot of things won't make sense, and we intentionally don't try to make it all make perfect sense.  We don't even want people using draft-04 anyway.

Author: What is the definition of a dialect? Is it different from what's here?

Reviewer: I didn't think we had used the word "vocabulary" before 2019-09, but I @handrews's word for it. The thing I'm trying to avoid is confusion about the general concept of a vocabulary vs a vocabulary that's part of the vocabulary system. Readers should understand that this refers to the concept of vocabulary, not just the specific mechanism in the Vocabulary System.

Reviewer 2: @Julian the term "dialect" emerged primarily over the course of a long series of discussions with OpenAPI, IIRC.  I don't remember if we had started using it during 2019-09, but it really became a thing between 2019-09 and 2020-12.  Of course, by the time 2020-12 went out I'd stepped away so I never got around to writing a formal definition into the spec.

I think I agree with @jdesrosiers that the concept of a vocabulary is more important than the mechanics, which are likely to change to some degree.  I haven't really thought about that in terms of how we want to define these words. 🤔

> A collection of [vocabularies](#vocabulary), along with an indication of whether supporting each vocabulary is required to process schemas written in the dialect.

Reviewer: I think the part about vocabularies potentially being optional is a Vocabulary System concept. I'd remove it.

```suggestion
A collection of [vocabularies](#vocabulary) that identify the set of keywords an implementation needs to understand to process a schema.
```

Reviewer 2: What definition of "Vocabulary System" are you using that results in you excluding optionality?  Have you built consensus around it?  The optionality of vocabularies is hardly an implementation detail.  And again, it is part of what is real _now_.

Reviewer 3: What about taking @jdesrosiers's wording but using "should" instead of "needs to"?

Reviewer 2: I think the original wording was clear as plain language.  Getting into "should" being a way to "suggest" something feels more spec-ese to me.

Dialects are identified by a URI, which [schemas](#schema) may then reference in their `$schema` [keyword](#keyword).
Doing so identifies the schema as being written in the dialect, and thereby indicates which keywords are usable within it, along with their intended meaning.

> The JSON Schema specification [defines](https://json-schema.org/specification.html#general-purpose-meta-schema) a number of dialects, each of which enable vocabularies suitable for the dialect's specific use case.

Author: I think I was definitely unhappy with pointing there -- my intention definitely wasn't to indicate `meta schemas == dialects` nor `these are 3 dialects`, but it's a bit of a reflection on how "widely" we use the dialect term that nowhere really on that page do we prominently say "this is the 2020 dialect page".

Changing this to just point to the whole page (without the fragment) though, I guess that's better?

> The JSON Schema specification [defines](https://json-schema.org/specification.html#general-purpose-meta-schema) a number of dialects, each of which enable vocabularies suitable for the dialect's specific use case.

Reviewer 2: @Julian we actually define the validation dialect in [section 5 of the validation spec](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-bhutton-json-schema-validation-01.html#section-5).

We haven't published a Hyper-Schema spec in a while so we don't have a current formal publication of that dialect.  However, there is a [section in the OpenAPI spec on dialects](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/latest.html#specifying-schema-dialects) which could be referenced as an example.

Strictly speaking, according to the specification, schemas are themselves JSON documents, though it is somewhat common for them to be authored or maintained in other languages which are easily translated to JSON, such as YAML.

In recent [drafts](#draft) of the specification, a schema is either a JSON object or a JSON boolean value.

### vocabulary

A collection of related [keywords](keyword), grouped to facilitate re-use.

> A vocabulary typically includes both a [meta-schema](#meta-schema) which formally defines the keywords it contains, as well as a prose document or specification which explains the semantics of its keywords in a way suitable for implementers and users of the vocabulary.

Reviewer 2: This is not quite true.  The formal definition of what keywords a vocabulary contains is its specification, whatever form that takes.  We will eventually have a machine-readable format for this.  The meta-schema describe's the vocabulary's intended syntax, but you can have different meta-schemas for the same vocabulary.  You usually wouldn't- if you want to tweak usage by, for example, forbidding the use of the keyword `not`, you'd probably do that in the dialect meta-schema.

But the important thing here is that vocabulary/keyword _semantics_ are defined by the vocabulary specification.  Meta-schemas, either vocabulary or dialect-level, describe the valid syntax.  These two things are intentionally separated and able to vary somewhat independently.

Author: Got it, will tweak.

Strictly speaking, according to the specification, schemas are themselves JSON documents, though it is somewhat common for them to be authored or maintained in other languages which are easily translated to JSON, such as YAML.

In recent [drafts](#draft) of the specification, a schema is either a JSON object or a JSON boolean value.

### vocabulary

A collection of related [keywords](keyword), grouped to facilitate re-use.

A vocabulary is specified by a prose document or specification which explains the semantics of its keywords in a way suitable for implementers and users of the vocabulary.
It often also includes a [meta-schema](#meta-schema) (or multiple metaschemas) which define the syntax of its keywords.

Anyone can create and publish a vocabulary, and implementations generally will include facilities for extending themselves with support for additional vocabularies and their keywords.
The JSON Schema specification includes a number of vocabularies which cover each of the keywords it defines.

> Vocabularies are identified by a URI which may be referenced via the `$vocabulary` keyword in order to enable the vocabulary within a [dialect](#dialect).

Reviewer: I'd drop this line as Vocabulary System specific.

Reviewer 2: And I would not.  Listing the `$vocabulary` keyword makes things more concrete and makes it easier for people to find out more.  While it is part of the "vocabulary system", that is what is currently in use, and is more important than the very vague usage of these terms pre-2019-09.

Strictly speaking, according to the specification, schemas are themselves JSON documents, though it is somewhat common for them to be authored or maintained in other languages which are easily translated to JSON, such as YAML.

In recent [drafts](#draft) of the specification, a schema is either a JSON object or a JSON boolean value.

### vocabulary

> A tightly related collection of related [keywords](keyword), grouped to facilitate re-use.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A tightly related collection of [keywords](keyword), grouped to facilitate re-use.
```

or

```suggestion
A collection of tightly related [keywords](keyword), grouped to facilitate re-use.
```

Maybe reduce redundancy a little?

Author: Thanks, fixed!
